3/8/24, 3:15 PM

Temple Towns and Pilgrimage Centres (Thanjavur)

Temple Towns and Pilgrimage Centres (Thanjavur)
Social Science

Mediveal Indian History

Introduction
Towns were the core of any kingdom in medieval India. The emergence of big towns and
cities started in the eighth century. It was the time of many big emirates like Cholas,
Chalukyas and Pallavas. Each kingdom had many towns and they were classified according
to their purpose. Some were Administrative towns, it was the residing place of kings and
nobles and all the administrative activities were controlled from there. Other categories
were a commercial town, Port town, Temple town etc. Towns were generally fortified and
had a market in them. The rulers provided special protection to towns as they were one of
the sources of revenue for the kingdom. Sometimes towns had more than one function.
Thanjavur was an administrative centre for the Chola empire and it was also a pilgrimage
town, as it had famous temples and shrines inside the town.

Somnath temple
B. SurajPatro1997, CC BY-SA 4.0 , via Wikimedia Commons

Administrative Centre
The Chola empire was founded by Vijayalaya in 850 CE. The Chola empire became one of
the strongest kingdoms of that time. It gained control over all of southern India, Sri Lanka
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/temple-towns-and-pilgrimage-centres-thanjavur

1/5

3/8/24, 3:15 PM

Temple Towns and Pilgrimage Centres (Thanjavur)

and the Maldives. Vijayalaya had captured Thanjavur from Pallavas. The greatest rulers of
the Chola empire were Rajaraja Chola and Rajendra Chola.
Thanjavur became the capital of Cholas. Chola kings built many temples to
celebrate their victories. Some of the most famous temples were the Brihadishwara
temple and the Rajarajeshwar temple built by Rajaraja Chola. The Cholas had a
tradition of installing the image and statues of kings and queens inside the temple
campus.
The city of Thanjavur is situated on the banks of river Krishna and it became the
biggest pilgrimage site. People would come here to worship and they were
intoxicated by the marvellous architecture of the city.
Apart from the temple, the city had palaces with mandapas or platforms, from
where the king held the courts and issued orders. There were barracks for the
army stationed near the palace.
Another major feature of this town was the market. It was filled with traders selling
food grains like wheat and millet. Spices, Jewellery and Clothes were the major
items in the market.
Thanjavur played a crucial role in influencing the economy of nearby villages and
towns. The Saliya weavers of Thanjavur and Uraiyur produced fine cotton clothes
for the king and nobles and also for the public.
Weavers also produce clothes to make flags for ceremonies in the temple.
Sculptures from the nearby village Svamimalai were experts in making Bronz idols
and ornamental metal lamps. They produced multiple idols to sell in the market
and also for the temples in the city.

https://www.tutorialspoint.com/temple-towns-and-pilgrimage-centres-thanjavur

2/5

3/8/24, 3:15 PM

Temple Towns and Pilgrimage Centres (Thanjavur)

Sculpture at Thanjavur
Matthew T Rader, https://matthewtrader.com, CC BY-SA 4.0 , via Wikimedia Commons

Temple Town and Pilgrimage Centre
Temple towns were towns, which were built around a specific temple. Such types of towns
were generally fortified and economic and social activities were related to temples.
Thanjavur is an immaculate example of a temple town. It is built around the Brihadeshwar
temple, which was built by Rajaraja Chola in the tenth century. The town of Thanjavur was
the capital of the Chola empire.
Kings built temples to celebrate their victories and to demonstrate their devotion to the
deities. The temples were given lands and grants. Temples were authorised to run their
administration and collect the taxes from their land to feed the pilgrims and carry out
rituals and celebrate festivals. Temples also received donations from the pilgrims and
nobles.
Temples used their collected wealth to finance the banking system and trade. The vast
income from temples was regulated by the temple committee. With the establishment of
the temple, the community of priests, artisans, labourers, businessmen and others resided
near the temple as they were dependent on the temple for their livelihood. They used to
cater for the pilgrims who came to the temple. Gradually the number of communities living
near the temple increased and a new town was formed.

https://www.tutorialspoint.com/temple-towns-and-pilgrimage-centres-thanjavur

3/5

3/8/24, 3:15 PM

Temple Towns and Pilgrimage Centres (Thanjavur)

There were many temple towns established in early medieval India, including Bhillasvamin
in Madhya Pradesh and Somnath in Gujrat. Other significant temple towns were
Kanchipuram and Madurai in Tamil Nadu and Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh. The pilgrimage
sites gradually converted into townships. Tiruvannamalai in Tamil Nadu and Vrindavan in
Uttar Pradesh is the example of such townships. The temple town of Ajmer showed the
example of religious coexistence as it was the capital of Chauhan Kings in the 12th century
and later the Sufi saint Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti settled there, which attracted many
devotees and became one of the most famous shrines in India.

Somnath temple
B. SurajPatro1997, CC BY-SA 4.0 , via Wikimedia Commons

Conclusion
After the emergence of many new kingdoms and empires, many towns and cities were
established. There were different kinds of towns in medieval India. Some were
Administrative, Commercial, Port, temple towns, etc. Towns were classified on their
characteristics. The temple town was formed when some people gradually started settling
around the temple. Such communities were priests, labourers, artisans and all those who
catered for the pilgrims and look for the administration of the temple. Thanjavur was the
temple town in eighth-century India. It was established by the Chola empire and it
became one of the most famous towns in India. Thanjavur also acted as a temple town as
well as an Administrative town. The market of Thanjavur grew and people from nearby
villages also profited from this trade. Temples received grants from kings and also had
their land, from where they had the right to collect taxes.

https://www.tutorialspoint.com/temple-towns-and-pilgrimage-centres-thanjavur

4/5

3/8/24, 3:15 PM

Temple Towns and Pilgrimage Centres (Thanjavur)

FAQs
Q.1. How urbanisation was influenced by temples?
Ans. Temples were the areas of continuous pilgrimages and to cater for the pilgrims some
communities like priests, artisans, workers, etc. resided near the temples. There was the
unification of the community and gradually this community grew and formed a town. Such
towns were important in trade and commerce.
Q.2. Why Thanjavur was famous?
Ans. It was famous for its many characteristics −
Thanjavur had marvellous architecture.
It showed the high level of urbanisation.
It had a huge market selling Grains, Jewellery and clothes.
It was a pilgrimage site.
Q.3. Which communities benefited from the temple in Thanjavur?
Ans. Communities of weavers like Saliya of Thanjavur and Uriyar made cotton clothes for
flags used in temple ceremonies and they also made clothes for kings and common
masses. Another community was of Sculptors.
Q.4. How water was supplied to Thanjavur?
Ans. Water in the city came from the wells and tanks built by the kings. The water also
came from the Krishna river.
Q.5. Which technique was used in the Chola period to make bronze statues?
Ans. In the Chola period, the Lost wax technique was used to make the Bronze statue. It
was a technique which used wax and molten metal.

https://www.tutorialspoint.com/temple-towns-and-pilgrimage-centres-thanjavur

5/5

